
#  Photoshoot Import

This macOS application is designed to import photos (of any format) from one source folder to a destination folder, renaming files and putting them into subfolders according to the structure of your choosing.

It relies on [ExifTool](https://exiftool.org/), to access the photos' metadata so they can be used in the process.

## Installation

Just download the **Photoshoot Import** .dmg file and copy the application in your Applications folder.

**Photoshoot Import** requires ExifTool, which can be installed using their installer (available for download on their [website](https://exiftool.org/)), or via [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) by typing the following command line in a terminal:

`brew install exiftool`

The path to the `exiftool` executable can then be configured in **Photoshoot Import**'s settings, accessible via the main menu. **Photoshoot Import** will try to guess the location of the `exiftool` at launch (it should be `/usr/local/bin/exiftool` if installed via the ExifTool installer, or `/opt/homebrew/bin` if installed via Homebrew).

## Usage

Importing photos from a shooting requires the following parameters:

 - Source folder: contains all the photos to import (e.g. a memory card)
 - Destination folder: will contain all the imported photos
 - Output format: tells how **Photoshoot Import** shall arrange and rename the imported photos in the destination folder
 - Recursive: tells if **Photoshoot Import** shall crawl the source folder recursively for photos to import, or if it shall only import photos that sit directly under the source folder
 - Import mode: tells **Photoshoot Import** to either copy the imported files (keeping the originals in the source folder) or move them (suppressing the originals from the source folder).

### Output format

**Photoshoot Import**'s magic happens thanks to a useful language that makes use of variables to name the folders and imported photos exactly how you want for later processing.

A variable is surrounded by opening and closing `'#'` characters, taking the form `#variable#`. There are 3 types of variables:

 - `file`, for properties related to the photo as a file on the filesystem,
 - `exif`, for properties contains in the photo's EXIF metadata (if any),
 - `sequence`, for generating unique numbers

#### File variables

File variables refer to properties of the source file on the filesystem, and start with `file:<property>`, where `<property>` can be anything from the list below. Examples are given for a file sitting at `folder/subfolder/image.jpg`, that was created on 2024-01-01 12:34:56 and modified on 2024-02-10 01:02:03

| Property | Description | Value |
|----------|-------------|------|
| `name` | The complete, original source file name | `image.jpg` |
| `ext`   |  The source file extension | `jpg` |
| `namenoext` | The source file name, without extension | `image` |
| `path` | The path of the source file's parent folder, relative to the selected source folder | `folder/subfolder/` |
| `creationdate` | The date of creation of the file on the filesystem | `20240102` |
| `modificationdate` | The date of last modification of the file on the filesystem | `20240210` |

For the properties `createdate` and `modificationdate`, the date format is `yyyyMMdd` by default. It can be specified by appending the character `':'` and the desired format to the property, e.g. `#file:creationdate:yyMM`. See [Date Format Patterns](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-31/tr35-dates.html#Date_Format_Patterns) for available date patterns.


#### EXIF variables

EXIF variables refer to properties stored in the EXIF metadata of images, and start with `exif:<property>`, where property can be any EXIF tag name that ExifTool can read. See [EXIF Tags](https://exiftool.org/TagNames/EXIF.html) for a complete list.

Some EXIF properties, such as `DateTimeOriginal`, correspond to dates in the format `yyyy:MM:dd HH:mm:ss`. You can transform these dates by appending the character `':'` and the desired format to the property, e.g.: `#exif:DateTimeOriginal:yyMM#.jpg`. This will have no effect if the EXIF property cannot be parsed as a date.

> **Note:** If an EXIF property isn't found in a file's metada, **Photoshoot Import** inserts an empty string in its stead. E.g. the format `Photo #exif:CreateDate#.jpg` will output `Photo .jpg` if the `CreateDate` tag is missing in the photo's metadata.

> **Note:** Using EXIF variables when importing a large quantity of photos may yield poor performances.

#### Sequence variables

Sequence variables are number sequences generated by **Photoshoot Import**. There are two kinds of sequences, `global` and `local`. Both start at 1, and both are incremented by 1 for each file imported, but the local sequence is reset to 1 for each new folder created.

The format of the sequence number can also be specified by appending the number of zeros to the variable. For instance, `#sequence:global:4#` will generate sequence numbers of 4 characters, padded with 0, from `0001` to `9999`. The default, if unspecified, is 1 (e.g.: `#sequence:local#` is equivalent to `#sequence:local:1#`).

For instance, if you import 5 files, 2 JPEG and 3 RAW, and the output format separate JPEG and RAW files in distinct folders, here's what you will obtain:

Output format: `#file:ext#/#file:namenoext#_#sequence:local#_#sequence:global:4#.#file:ext#`

```
+ JPEG/
    + photo_1_0001.JPEG
    + photo_2_0002.JPEG
+ RAW/
    + photo_1_0003.RAW
    + photo_2_0004.RAW
    + photo_3_0005.RAW
```

#### Constants and path separators

Anything that is not a variable is treated as a constant string, except for `'/'` characters which are treated as path separators for the creation of folders.

For instance, the output format `import/photos/photo_#file:name#` will generate the following structure in the destination folder:

```
+ import/
    + photos/
        + photo_<filename>
```

> **Note:** If the evalution of a variable returns a value that contains `'/'` characters, they will also be treated as path separators.

### Examples

Let say you want to organize your photos by the year and month of their capture, renaming them with a common name and a sequence number:

`#exif:DateTimeOriginal:yyyy#/#exif:DateTimeOriginal:MM#/photo_#sequence:local:4#.#file:ext#`

### Name conflits

The flexibility of the output format allows for lots of possibilities, including that of importing two different files into the same folder and with the same name, thus creating a name conflict.

An obvious case of name conflict would occur if you tried to import two photos using the output format `photo.jpg`, which would cause the two imported photos to be renamed to `photo.jpg` and put into the same folder, and which is not possible.

**Photoshoot Import** handles name conflicts gracefully, by appending a space followed by a number to the name of the imported file (before its extension, if any) if it conflicts with a previously imported file.

For instance, if **Photoshoot Import** is told to rename a file to `photo.jpeg` and import it into a folder where `photo.jpeg` already exists, it will try to import the file by renaming it `photo 1.jpeg`.  If `photo 1.jpeg` also already exists, it will try to import the file by renaming it to `photo 2.jpeg`, and so on, each time incrementing the number by 1 until the name is finally available and the file can be imported.

> **Note:** It is preferable to explicitly set a sequence number in the output format, as it can avoid lots of failed attemps at writing files on disk, and thus improve performances.

## Test and build

The application can be tested via the following command:

`xcodebuild -scheme PhotoshootImport -target "PhotoshootImportTests" test`

The app can be built via the following command:

`xcodebuild -scheme PhotoshootImport -target "PhotoshootImport archive`

## License

See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file.
